Title: BIND9 Dynamic DNS
Date: 2010-04-07 09:04
Author: admin
Category: Tech HowTos
Tags: bind, ddns, dhcp, multibindadmin
Slug: bind9-dynamic-dns

I needed a better solution for Dynamic DNS than
[dyndns.org](http://www.dyndns.org) for something, so I set about
setting up DDNS through my BIND9 servers. I found a number of very
helpful blog posts, including [nsupdate: Painless Dynamic
DNS](http://linux.yyz.us/nsupdate/), [Painless DDNS part 2: the
server](http://linux.yyz.us/dns/ddns-server.html), [Secure dynamic DNS
howto](http://ops.ietf.org/dns/dynupd/secure-ddns-howto.html) and [A
DDNS Server Using BIND and
Nsupdate](http://www.oceanwave.com/technical-resources/unix-admin/nsupdate.html).
Of course, the [BIND configuration statement
reference](http://www.zytrax.com/books/dns/ch7/statements.html) was also
very helpful.

The whole process was relatively simple...

1.  Add an RR for the host I want, in the appropriate zone.
2.  Generate TSIG keys, distribute them to the client.
3.  Make sure you have logging enabled for things of interest in your
    `logging` section of `named.conf`:

~~~~{.text}
category dnssec { syslog_info; };
category update { syslog_info; };
category security { syslog_info; };
~~~~

4.  Create a keys.conf file for your keys (you *do* split your configs
    out into usable chunks, right?):

~~~~{.text}
key foo.example.com. {
    algorithm HMAC-MD5.SIG-ALG.REG.INT;
    secret "this is your secret here (after Key: in the .private file)";
};
~~~~

    <p>
    and include it in `named.conf` like
    `include "/etc/named.d/keys.conf";`

5.  Set an
    [`update-policy`](http://www.zytrax.com/books/dns/ch7/xfer.html#update-policy)
    statement in `named.conf`. I just added mine to a specific zone in a
    specific view (external), as that's the only place I would
    conceivably want updates right now.

    </p>
~~~~{.text}
update-policy {
    grant * self * A TXT;
};
~~~~

    <p>
    Assuming your TSIG keys are named for specific RRs, this will let
    any client (with a valid key setup on the server) update its own RR
    and nothing else.

6.  Finally, I created a script for ddns updates on the client. Since I
    want to be able to fire off this script manually or via cron (if I
    have to reload BIND, and until I make the needed changes to
    MultiBINDadmin), I bypassed the usual dhclient stuff and manually
    grab the current IP from the interface of interest. I symlinked this
    in `/etc/dhcp3/dhclient-exit-hooks.d` so it will run on DHCP
    updates.

    </p>
~~~~{.bash}
#!/bin/bash
IFACE="eth0"
TTL=3600
SERVER=ns1.example.com
HOSTNAME=foo.example.com
ZONE=example.com
KEYFILE=/root/ddns-keys/Kfoo.example.com.+157+12345.private

new_ip_address=`ifconfig $IFACE | grep "inet addr:" | awk '{print $2}' | awk -F ":" '{print $2}'`
new_ip_address=${new_ip_address/ /}

nsupdate -v -k $KEYFILE << EOF
server $SERVER
zone $ZONE
update delete $HOSTNAME A
update add $HOSTNAME $TTL A $new_ip_address
send
EOF
~~~~

When I finally got things setup, my only problem was with permissions on
the zone file directories, which was easily corrected.Once this was
straightened out, my `nsupdate` script ran flawlessly, and the update
was instantly (thanks to using "notify") propagated out to the slave
server.

The only problem that I now have is one of my own creation - I use a
small PHP application that I wrote
([MultiBINDadmin](http://multibindadmin.jasonantman.com/)) to manage
DNS. It's incredibly easy, as it keeps track of internal and external
IPs, and everything else, for my zones, and triggers a pull on the
master BIND server via the web interface. The only problem I now have is
that this messes with DDNS updates. First, if I make changes in the web
interface and there's already been a DDNS update that day, the zone
serial generated by MultiBINDadmin will match the automatically
incremented serial generated by the BIND server. Second, and more
troubling, when the BIND server reloads, it loses the dynamic update. So
when I push changes to a zone from the web interface, my dynamic updates
go away.

For the short-term, I'm just going to check the zone serial before I
make any updates and, if need be, manually increment it in the web tool.
As to losing the dynamic updates, I'm just going to have cron on the
client fire the `nsupdate` script every 30 minutes. I also did a little
kludge, setup a vhost on one of my web servers to answer for the dynamic
host (as a catch-all page), and set the IP of my web server as the
hard-coded RR address in the zone file. If someone tries to use the new
(DDNS through my BIND server) address for HTTP and for some reason the
current dynamic address disappeared (BIND reloaded), they'll get a
little page with a message and the old dyndns.org-based URL.

When I get around to it (or when this becomes a problem), I'll make two
changes to MultiBINDadmin:

1.  Before it pushes an update, check the current serial for the zone
    (ok, this may be a bit interesting, as the internal and external
    zones could have different serials) and increment from that.
2.  Have a "DDNS" flag in the database and GUI for RRs. For all flagged
    RRs, try to get the (unfortunately external) current address and
    update the record in the DB before the push.

The real question here, which I haven't looked into yet, is how I can
interrogate BIND about RRs for the external zone from an internal host.
