Title: How bad I am at communicating in 140 characters, and apologies to Randy Bias
Date: 2016-07-07 13:20
Author: Jason Antman
Category: Miscellaneous
Tags: open source, twitter, enterprise, docker
Slug: how-bad-i-am-at-communicating-in-140-characters-and-apologies-to-randy-bias
Summary: Thoughts on Enterprise software and tech journalism, and an apology.
Status: draft

This morning I had my first truly out-of-control Twitter conversation. And I've gotta say, I feel downright awful about it. I'm took a pause in my workday to start writing this, because I can't really conentrate on anything else. And perhaps the worst part is that, after reading the exchange over again, I'm pretty sure that the language I used - which would've been clear to my friends and those in my circles - came across entirely wrong. So first off, I feel like I owe [@randybias](https://twitter.com/randybias) a heartfelt apology; either my laguage was too based on a common view, or I'm just bad at expressing myself in 140 characters (or both). Whether we're talking about completely different things or not, I certainly did not intend to come across anywhere near as hostile as it was perceived. And I don't have anything against EMC - I've used EMC storage products at plenty of previous jobs, and I think the [things](https://emccode.com/) [I've](https://coprhd.github.io/) [seen](http://www.emc.com/campaign/emc-open-source/index.htm) EMC doing around open source are great (I'll admit that personally I'm a copyleft-ist, but I don't really expect established companies to make that leap).

Yesterday someone who I follow on Twitter shared a link to an article on the EMC Pulse blog by Josh Bernstein, [Why All Containers Won't be Successful](pulseblog.emc.com/2016/06/20/containers-wont-successful/). I'll admit I rarely read any analysis of the tech world written by vendors or the mainstream IT press; it's usually too far from my own view of things, and speaks to a world that I've tried hard to escape. The gist of the article, at least in my view, was that within a year one container technology (probably Docker, Mesosphere or Kubernetes) will emerge as a clear front-runner, and that (this is my interpretation) funding and product-ization will be the decider.

> It’s the fact that software is hard to manage, and there’s currently not one single complete product or solution in a platform. Software is only as good as the user’s ability to consume it, and if users are cobbling together software to make a single solution, odds are good that they’re spending human and monetary assets in a way that compromises efficiency rather than promotes it. With so many facets to enterprise IT, the majority of companies currently don’t have the ability to consume software-only products.
>
> _And this is the hole in the container market._

I [quote-retweeted](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/750709613679538178) that with the commentary, "Interesting take from the Enterprise. Always amazes me how nothing Enterprise makes sense to me..." and then later on [posted](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/750710652059193344), "Seems my twitter reading for this morning is full of "Enterprise", and people taking about "companies" that I thought were tools..."

Randy replied to my original retweet and a short exchange ensued (I considered not including this, but I do think it provides some context):

* [Randy](https://twitter.com/randybias/status/750740027848597504): "@j_antman Yeah. The guy who built the world’s largest Mesosphere deployment to run Apple Siri probably isn’t worth listening to."
* [Me](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/750740594973028352): "@randybias My comment was more about the 'this isn't ready yet because it's not a productized platform' feeling I got..."
* [Randy](https://twitter.com/randybias/status/750890299329695744): "@j_antman EMC has just as much riding on containers as anyone. Josh is giving an honest opinion about their state."
* [Randy](https://twitter.com/randybias/status/750890511829835776): "@j_antman You are welcome to disagree but his opinion has nothing to do with being at EMC. We aren’t exactly VMW’s favorite EMCers."
* [Me](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/751002807134748672): "@randybias I didn't think it had anything to do with EMC. For me it's about Enterprise vs the F/OSS world (1/2)"
* [Me](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/751002947698434048): "@randybias and the Enterprise world always wanting some packaged, un-customizable out-of-the-box "product" or "solution" (2/2)"
* [Randy](https://twitter.com/randybias/status/751014008329822208): "@j_antman Well that’s just plain asinine. F/OSS wouldn’t exist without “the enterprise”. Ideological stances like this waste everyone’s time"
* [Me](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/751014429823762432): "@randybias Not sure I agree about not existing without the enterprise... maybe many specific projects, but not in general (1/2)"
* [Me](https://twitter.com/j_antman/status/751014822536474628): "@randybias but this is more my career-long frustration of having good solutions shot down b/c they weren't a shiny packaged "product""

My intent was not to exclude Enterprise offerings, or to be a zealot. At least how I read it, the gist of the article was, "unless you're a super-special [unicorn](https://www.brandenwilliams.com/blog/2014/10/23/there-are-no-unicorns/), stay away from containers until there's a single frontrunner you can purchase." I think that attitude - ignore everything that's merely an open source project unless you're Twitter or Etsy - is a liability, and being dishonest to the technology. It seems like a sort of industry-wide FUD; "buy our product, or buy someone else's product, but for God's sake, don't use the open source stuff." Yes, I'm sure there are many companies that should probably wait for a packaged, supported, turnkey, one-size-fits-all container solution (side note: in my dialect, "one-size-fits-all" is an insult, or at least sarcasm). But that's a decision that should be made by each company, based on available resources, goals and capabilities. "Don't touch containers until there's a market-leading batteries-included product" is saying both "the majority of companies wouldn't benefit from having more in-house knowledge of/experience with containers" and "let the other people who _do_ adopt the F/OSS solutions choose what you'll use next year."

- I know a lot of what I'm about to say isn't in the best interest of a vendor at the time of sale, and by extension is largely ignored by much of the advertising-revenue-driven trade press, but I think it's in the best interest of the technology industry as a whole.
- I know I'm somewhat biased... I've always worked with primarily F/OSS, and at a high level, I guess most of that work really is connecting disparate pieces to form a cohesive whole - "glue" or tool development, or integration.

First off, I should say that I've always been a strong Free/Open Source Software (F/OSS) advocate, and personally, I'm a beliver in copyleft and in Free software that carries moral/ethical weight and protects users' freedom. I don't let the moral side of that into my work, beyond licensing my personal projects under the strongest copyleft license I can find. It _does_ bother me that "open source" has become the hot thing for companies to do and often loses the moral imperative, but that only matters to my professional life when some behemoth company decides to "un-open-source" the project we've adopted. So, there's my copyleftist disclaimer.

My career in tech - just over a decade - has gone from working as a software developer, to system administration/engineering, to tooling/automation development. While I changed titles, roles and employers, there's been one constant everywhere I've worked: I was part of a fast-moving, forward-thinking, innovative organization buried deep within a behemoth. Looking back at it, all of my jobs have been on teams that _got_ the culture and values of DevOps, even if nobody was calling it that. And in every case (to varying degrees) there was tension between my group, those who wanted to choose the best technology and ship code fast, and whatever Corporate / Enterprise IT organization existed, that generally... didn't. I think that for a lot of us who have worked in similar roles (especially those who have worked in open-source-friendly customer-facing web organizations within larger enterprises), the term "Enterprise IT" is pretty much synonymous with naysayers who care more about Gartner reports than what the business is asking of them, and who almost always are somewhere from dismissive to openly hostile towards F/OSS. I've been told with a straight face that developers shouldn't use Emacs, Vi or Atom as text editors because they don't come with Enterprise support agreements. I've been asked how much work it would take to remove Apache from a massive four-year-old existing web application, because we didn't have a vendor to go to if something went wrong. I've been told point-blank that a given open source project cannot be considered as an option because "you get what you pay for." In general, Enterprise IT has been a force against innovation or any out-of-the-box thinking.

It's also worth mentioning that, for almost all of my career, I've worked in sub-organizations that had an agile mindset. When evaluating software, the methodology that I'm used to is, "someone, take N weeks to spin up a proof-of-concept and get people to play with it. If it seems useful, we'll do a more thorough evaluation and roll-out."

I know there are good people out there in Enterprise IT, and I know there are people who make logical, informed decisions based on weighing all of the facts and trade-offs. I've just never been lucky enough to work with them, at least when it came to IT management. And unfortunately I know I'm not alone in using the term "Enterprise" to generally refer to people who choose products based on industry news and marketing, vendor maket cap, or who had the biggest booth at a trade show. In short, people who don't evaluate all their options objectively. And I feel bad for the people in Enterprise IT that don't fit into that mold; I've known quite a few of them, and most of them were frustrated because they were prevented from pursuing experiments or innovation that could've greatly benefited their company because it was seen as "not Enterprise-grade" or "not Enterprise-ready".

Essentially, I feel like "Enterprise IT" almost always implies an unjustifiable bias towards "buy" instead of "build", even when there's no fitting solution for sale, or building in-house would be significantly cheaper (I'll admit that may rarely be the case outside of certain kinds of organizations, but to say building is always worse is marketing hyperbole). And generally has an attitude of "no" instead of, "ok, how can we all solve this problem?" They're obsessed with providing the best, most stable solution possible, even if the business's explicit demand is, "it doesn't need to be great, but this special probject needs to be done in 3 weeks."

I've usually thought of Enterprise IT as the people who tell me "DNS takes 3 weeks and a web server takes a quarter" when my VP says he needs a marketing website up by the end of the week, or the people who tell us that our chosen best technology can't be used because a bigger vendor has a shinier product (or because it's a F/OSS project).

My issue isn't with Enterprise software, or vendors thereof. It's with the mindset that if you're an Enterprise, every problem must be solved with a commercial product advertised as Enterprise software, from an Enterprise vendor.

The argument that container tech isn't ready and Enterprises should wait could, in my mind, be made as an argument not to use EMC's open source projects, or anything else that isn't a complete solution.

I'll admit this is colored by what I do for a living: tooling/automation and solving integration problems. But more often than not, I've been horribly frustrated by commercial products simply being unable to perform a required task (usually integrating with some other system) that most if not all of the comparable F/OSS offerings could do without a problem.

The article stated, "the majority of companies currently don’t have the ability to consume software-only products." I take exception with that. My hunch is that - at least among companies with enough technology to build or buy a container solution - they already are. And they're probably already running Docker, Mesosphere, or Kubernetes, or all three. They just don't know it, because Enterprise IT said "no, we don't do that" or "we'll let you know in a year", so someone opened a new AWS or GCE account and installed it there. I've worked in jobs where a significant portion of my time was spent explicitly engineering or developing _around_ problems artifically introduced by Enterprise IT bureaucracy. In my view, probably the single biggest driver of public cloud adoption in many companies was the fact that it gave frustrated product owners an alternative to waiting months for infrastructure. In short: your company's use of technology is a self-healing network. Legal requirements aside, if Enterprise IT provides an unacceptable delay, someone will find a new shorter path and take it.

Admittedly, "cobbling together software to make a single solution" has been my job for my entire career. It's the Unix philosophy and the expectation when working with F/OSS. For the many use cases, it's really the only way that can actually scale starting at the small end of the budget (i.e. when you're starting with an un-funded project). And as to the second part of that statement - "odds are good that they’re spending human and monetary assets in a way that compromises efficiency rather than promotes it" - I'm sure that's true in some cases, but certainly not all. It took my team probably about 40 hours of work to stand up a Docker Swarm cluster (mind you, this is just 4 hosts, and just used for test and delopment tooling, as that's where our pilot is starting). I have no idea how much an Enterprise-targeting vendor would charge for that, but it's probably more than I make in a week.

So what am I saying with all this?

1. The people who hear that "X isn't ready yet, because it's not a complete product in a platform" are going to get left behind, and they're not going to have the expertise to conduct an honest evaluation once there are product-ized offerings. Sure, there's always industry analysis and consultants to help, but that's not a substitute for in-house expertise that has the best interests of the company in mind. In my opinion, the answer to "X isn't ready for the whole Enterprise yet" shouldn't be "come back in a year." It should be, "find some interested people and do a pilot or proof-of-concept of the current options, and have the participants help evaluate whether you _need_ a product/solution, and if so, which one is the best fit." As technologists giving advice to people likely less-well-versed in a specific area, and possibly not technical at all, we have a responsibility to communicate that there's not a one-size-fits-all solution, and using existing open source tools may be a perfectly viable route depending on needs and abilities.
2. Virtually everyone I know of who's using Docker right now isn't using anything product-ized. They're running Docker. They're probably running a toolset around it, and maybe that's all open source or all products or a mix of both. Ok, sure, I don't think I'd throw every workload a company has on Docker today. But that doesn't mean it's not ready to trial, or pilot for an internal application, so technical staff can begin to get experience around containers.

Experimentation and finding new solutions to problems is at the core of so many parts of a business, whether it's sales, marketing or management. But I see so much talk in terms of Enterprise IT of both trying to stay ahead of the curve and best serve the needs of the business, and that everything has to be Enterprise-ready with an insane support SLA and a big price tag? Why is Enterprise IT so averse to experimentation, innovation and agility? I'm not suggesting that everyone run out and move their critical business processes to Docker this week. But I'm sure there are plenty of Enterprise IT groups that would generate not only useful experience but also goodwill among their (internal) customers if they were more willing to take an attitude of, "we know you're interested in Docker. Here's a non-production Docker environment that you can play with or use for test/development environments. It's a proof-of-concept and only supported during business hours as time allows, but if it seems valuable, let us know and we'll get it on our roadmap and do a real evaluation."

################

There's a certain mindset that I've seen all too often in Enterprise IT; that the value of software is determined by the size, market cap or reputation of the vendor, that industry news and analysis is the last word for everyone, and that F/OSS is completely worthless and has no place in the Enterprise.

Choosing software - whether it's an open source project or a vendor product - is complicated. What's right for one project and company won't necessarily be right for another. And there's a big difference between choosing software for large-scale production deployment, choosing something for a small-scale pilot/proof-of-concept or a single self-supporting team, and choosing something for purely internal use.

The gist of my feeling is: experience, knowledge, learning and experimentation are good. Why should Enterprise IT completely avoid the current open source container projects? I'm sure most companies have at least a few people in their development or operations organizations who are already using Docker, or want to. Identify interested parties and spin up a sandbox environment for people to use, test deploying a simple non-critical internal application on it, or use Docker to speed up the creation and destruction of development/test environments. There are plenty of low-risk, small-scale problems that open source container projects can help with. And in the process, everyone who interacts with them gets knowledge and experience with containers, gets to learn and use something new (which is generally a morale boost), and can provide much more knowledgeable input when it comes time to evaluate options for a larger-scale deployment.

Culture of DevOps, Agile, experimentation, and learning by doing.

So many times, I've seen Enterprise IT identify a need of their customers (such as virtualization or containers or X), and then work in isolation to identify contenders, talk to vendors, and then choose and implement a solution with little to no input.
